---
created: 2025-05-09
---
> [!Question] Key Question
> 如何解决人工智能带来的工作消失引发的意义危机？

> By 2050 a new class of people might emerge – the useless class. People who are not just unemployed, but unemployable. 

We will have the technology to feed them with UBI -- the real problem is with meaning

> The real problem will then be to keep the masses occupied and content. People must engage in purposeful activities, or they go crazy. So what will the useless class do all day?

How did we cope this this problem throughout history? -- By creating large collective virtual realitiy games. 

> For thousands of years, billions of people have found meaning in playing virtual reality games. In the past, we have called these virtual reality games “religions”.

> Consumerism too is a virtual reality game. You gain points by acquiring new cars, buying expensive brands and taking vacations abroad, and if you have more points than everybody else, you tell yourself you won the game.

> To the best of our scientific knowledge, human life has no meaning. The meaning of life is always a fictional story created by us humans.

since humans cannot find meaning in the physical reality, people have always needed to create and find meaning in virtual realities (consumerism, religions, etc.)

Applying the same logic: 

> Hence virtual realities are likely to be key to providing meaning to the useless class of the post-work world.

In other words -- meaning will not dissappear (because it is not dependent on working), but instead transfer to other realities. 意义不会消失，只会转移

> the end of work will not necessarily mean the end of meaning, because meaning is generated by imagining rather than by working

There is no reality. We have always lived in a virtual game we collectively create and play in. 

> But what about truth? What about reality? Do we really want to live in a world in which billions of people are immersed in fantasies, pursuing make-believe goals and obeying imaginary laws? Well, like it or not, that’s the world we have been living in for thousands of years azlready.

[source](obsidian://open?vault=MediaLib&file=00%20Inbox%2FThe%20meaning%20of%20life%20in%20a%20world%20without%20work)
