---
created: 2025-01-08
tags:
uid: 1ahU
---
Imagine walking into the interview of a big company like this, you know, looking around and sitting down, and after the interviewer asks the first question, you're like, you try to answer, but then said that. I don't really like this question. "You know, actually, you can tell what a company is like, just by listening to the interview questions they ask". And I have to say, I don't feel good walking into this company.  
  
I know this is one of those companies that you will regret once you join. And the elevator, I heard people talking blah, blah, blah, blah, and, and I just feel fortunate that that while you guys are stuck here, and your position in this room in this building, I can still move freely before I join, at least for now.  
  
And then imagine then standing up, and you know, just leaving here saying good luck to the interviewers. You know, it's a flip of the power dynamics. It's like you judging the company, instead of the company judging you and you make yourself feel superior in that sense.  
  
What we can get from this, I guess is the fact that never go to interview in the position of the weak side, right, try to make yourself become the dominant side. And instead of begging someone to give you a position or anything, try to make that thing come for you, right. The ideal situation would be, instead of going to the interview, and through the application process, let the CEO of the company directly come to you and beg you to join their company, probably by showcasing your work to the public in such a strong way that no one can resist. And they just know that you, you have to be in their company.

similar: [[Make success come to you instead of chasing after success]]